Dr. Williams, first of all, we'd like to begin with what you're working on right now.
I'm working on a novel called The Queen of the Legion.
There's another story about the Legion of Space, a series that I started back in the
early 30s.
Is it going to be serialized like the other?
Well, here's hoping the market's sort of uncertain.
Fred Pole gave me a contract for it a couple of years ago, and I was president of the Science
Fiction Writers of America and involved in other things, and it has taken time to do,
but it's finally falling together, and I'm putting it into my new word processor.
I'm pretty enthusiastic about it now.
The main character is a girl, and at first I was sort of uncertain whether I could be
convincing in presenting a woman's point of view, but I've sort of fallen in love with
Jill by now.
I think I know her pretty well and like her, and I hope the readers do.
Have you finished that trilogy with Fred Rick Pole, the one on the Dyson Sphere, the three
volumes on that?
No, I'm sorry to say we haven't.
I finished my part of the second volume some years ago, I think, and a year and a half
ago Judy Lynn Dallaray gave us a revised contract with a larger advance, and her idea
then was to publish all three proposed volumes in one thick volume, and Fred was going to
get it out last March at that time, but that's the last I've heard about it.
He's promoting his work, he's involved in many projects, and that's always been the
history of working with him.
He's a great collaborator, but he takes his time, so I have hope that he'll eventually
get back to it.
Have you, recently you've been redoing some of the humanoid material too, correct?
Have you finished, is there a novel that's come out of that?
Yeah, there's a new novel called The Humanoid Touch that I finished all over a year ago,
and it will be published, I think, this summer in a limited signed edition from Fantasia
Press with a whole round heart, heart cover this November.
Part of that was serialized and analyzed.
The analog reprinted or printed the middle of it under the title Humanoid Universe.
There was a reference in that story or somewhere to a book called Ten Trillion Wise Machines.
Well, that was my second title.
At first I was going to call the novel The Humanoid Universe, and Fred didn't like that,
and I wanted to call it Ten Trillion Wise Machines, which is a title I like, but people
wanted the name Humanoid in the title, and also that's pretty long to go on a book jacket.
And J.K. Klein, a science fiction photographer, is the man who came up with the title The
Humanoid Touch, which I think is appropriate and brief and has humanoid in it, and I'm
very happy with it.
Perhaps you could explain the difference between humanoid and androids and robots.
Well, in my mind, the robots are a mechanical man, and the hymnids are a type of robot,
that is, they're made out of plastic and steel and operated by remote control, by computers,
and so forth.
And androids, as I use the term in the commentaries many years ago, and I think it's generally
used as a, let's say a meat machine, a synthetic or artificial human being made out of flesh
and blood, the sort of thing that is possible to produce these days, or in the near future,
by genetic engineering, let's say, that is, androids bleed in humanoid's drip grease.
It's interesting that you're going back and doing some of the material you started, well,
the legion material, the humanoid's and so forth.
Was it 1928, you began publishing?
The first story was published in the November, December 1928, that's the year of amazing,
and I've been a science fiction writer ever since.
That was in the tradition of merit, wasn't it more of a fantasy kind of?
Pretty much, at that time I was infatuated with merit.
I haven't re-read him for many years, lest the spell be gone, but the first stories I
wrote, well, were full of these attempts that had purple color illustrated with too many
adjectives, and later I began to try for more convincing settings and stronger characters
and fewer adjectives.
What made you start writing?
Well, I grew up on a sand hill farm in the south part of this county, when times were
pretty grim, and I, well, wanted to be some sort of scientist without any direction or
means to get a scientific education, and a few months after Grinchbach started the
Old Amazing, when I came across some copies of it, and I was immediately fascinated with
experiments that worked with traveling time and spaceships to other worlds and all sorts
of wonderful things, and it's been an important share of my life ever since.
Did you start for the money?
No, the money was, well, almost immaterial. I got twenty-five dollars for that first story
eventually, and after a couple of years I earned enough writing science fiction, so I
didn't have to do anything else, but half the secret was that I wasn't married and
was willing to live economically, so I certainly didn't do it for the money. After two years
in college I was offered a student assistantship in the chemistry lab, and I could have had
a different career as a chemist, probably only I was more fascinated with science fiction
than I was with solid science by that time, though I have tried to keep up as best a layman
can with what's going on in science.
Was the account true that I read in one place where you didn't know that your story had
been accepted until you saw the magazine?
Yeah, that's true. I wrote these stories on an old Remington Basket Model typewriter
and a purple ribbon, and two or three of them came back, one of them was with a misspelled
word in the title, and the metal man never did come back, and I was over at Canyon, Texas
walking by a newsstand one day, and I saw my metal man on the cover of Amazing, and
it was quite a thrill.
What was it like to write for the pulp, say, through the thirties and so forth? Was it
a part of something, or did you feel isolated out here?
Well, there were many around here who could share your interest.
Well, the science fiction world has always been a sort of special community where I suppose
we felt we had our own special hand on science in the future and the shape of things to come,
and though I didn't see other science fiction people very often, I read their stories and
read letters in the magazines and so forth. In those days, before the paperbacks and before
TV and before the comics, my people read a lot more for entertainment than they do nowadays,
and there were really three sorts of magazines. There were quality magazines like Harper's
and the old Scribner's, Atlantic for people with brains and the slicks printed on coated
paper that would take good advertising for people with money to spend and the pulps for
people who had neither brains nor money, but we had a lot of fun in the pulps even if we
were looked down upon widely and eventually by a science fiction gut recognized as being
not entirely without brains, let's say, and nowadays there's a little bit of money in
it sometimes.
The fact that it wasn't call science fiction, was it?
No, when I started, my first story was printed as science fiction, Hugo Gernsback ran the
word science and fiction together. He invented the term science fiction in 29, I think, and
at that time you had to explain what it was. I used to say it was adventure stories with
a science background.
Well, wasn't Gernsback, didn't he want more scientifically oriented stories?
Well, he preached a gospel that science fiction was sugar coated science, that it was education
and he got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed to vet the science and
science wonder stories when he started that, but actually I think that was as much for
him to impress the readers as anything else because he did use true science in his stories
when he could get it, but he also printed a lot of stories that were pretty wild. I think
always in the magazine the adventure element was more important than the science.
I've only seen a few copies of those very early pulps. They say the amazing stories.
That's a pretty big size.
The size that time is nowadays.
Were there other sizes too or types?
Well, amazing was that size and wonder stories when Gernsback started that, but they were also,
and they were hardly regular pulps because in the beginning they were amazing was filled up with
reprints of classic science fiction and the rates were so low that professional writers
didn't write for them so when they wrote new stories they were mostly written by amateurs
such as myself, but the pulp magazines were published in chains with, well, sometimes
quite a different magazines. There were mass economies there because they could print the
covers all in the same press run and so forth and they had a standard smaller size.
Astounding came along from Clayton first as astounding stories of super science.
It was the pulp size.
What was the average rate for stories nowadays?
Well, Gernsback paid a half a cent or a word or less, which meant well, you'd get $25 for a short story
and $75 for a novelette, but Clayton paid two cents a word and up, which is one reason maybe
the Clayton magazines were bankrupt in the Great Depression, but that meant that I could
pound out 4,000 words a day for two days and earn 160 bucks, which was a fabulous feat for a farm kid
in depression days.
That was a pretty good income back then.
It was. It was a lot of money.
Did you get much reader response? Did fans or readers ever?
Well, of course, I didn't know many people in the locality who read science fiction, but in those days
the backs of the magazine were filled up with letters and tiny type from readers, and that was the
principal reader response. I think the editors favored them because they didn't have to pay for the
letters, and they were interesting to us. I used to write them myself as well as read them.
It was the beginning of fandom, I suppose.
From when I can gather, reading back on your publishing history and so forth, through the
30s, late 20s or early 30s, you were mostly writing, I guess I would call it space opera, the
legion material.
I've never objected to space opera. I still think it's wonderful, and I even think that
Star Wars could have been made out of my legion stories as well as it was from something else.
I enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent daydream, and well, the pulp readers
were mostly young and as naive as I was, and the space opera was a sort of symbolic escape
from all sorts of things.
I notice, I'm not sure how I would phrase this, a change or a deepening or a more serious
aspect to your fiction that begins in the late 30s. Would I be right in saying that?
Well, probably. I was growing up and the readers were growing up. That's something that's been
going on in science fiction, at least in American science fiction all along. I think you can draw
a distinction between, let's say, European or mainstream science fiction on the one hand,
which has always been recognized and treated as literature and the pulp American science
fiction, which was looked down on. But as the readers of that grew older, some of them
started writing, some of them started editing magazines, most of them outgrew science fiction,
but some of them didn't. So there was a continual increase in the education, the sophistication
and so forth of the whole field, or maybe you should call it a diversification, because
there's still a readership for Edgar Rice Burroughs and Robert E. Howard and whatever.
There are also people who, let's say, former fans who are now academic fans who are teaching
science fiction courses and writing scholarly articles on science fiction to meet the publisher
parish test and so forth. So essentially the field is just diversified into all sorts of
levels and areas of interest.
Did Campbell influence the way you wrote fiction at all?
Well, yes. I think he influenced the way nearly everybody wrote science fiction, because when he
became editor of Amazing and later changed the, I mean astounding, later changed the name
to Analog by, he had the best highest paying market in the field. He was, well let's say,
science fiction was serious to him as a way of speculating about science and its impact
in the future of mankind and so forth. He was tremendously inventive. He was full of ideas
that he shared very freely and everybody who was writing science fiction for those years
was influenced by Campbell, it seems to me, whether directly or not. If they weren't trying to write
for him and reading his letters, they were reading such writers as Heinlein and DeKamp
and Sturgeon and a dozen others who were Kamal writers. And some people resetted Kamal and felt
that it was an effort to write for him. Kamal, Heinlein used to complain that you couldn't sell
him adult sex, but Kamal and I thought so much alike so that I always felt at home with
this magazine and enjoyed working with him and he gave me occasional very useful suggestions
that I used and he never did, well, edit my material heavily or try to persuade me to say
anything I didn't want to say. I believe that personally he was optimistic about science
in the future, but when I wrote such a pessimistic dystopian thing as with folded hands, he published
it as it was and asked for more.
I was going to ask you about that with folded hands. You sold that one to Campbell, you sold
it to him?
Right, and he suggested a sequel to it. He was fanatic for various things that look sort
of like a crackpot nowadays, including Joseph Ryan and parapsychology and he suggested if
people's hands were folded they would use their minds, they would develop parapsychological
powers and perhaps defeat the humanoids. I felt that the humanoids couldn't be defeated
so that the ending of my novel was sort of ambiguous, but he published it as I said it
to him and the readers seemed to like it well enough.
I was interested in what you wrote in the afterword to one of the recent additions of the
humanoids, the way your interpretation of it has changed. Didn't she used to see yourself,
you said as a romantic and the humanoids were bad, but then you altered that?
Well, I think so. That is at one level, since the humanoids are machines, the perfect machine
as originally stated, the theme, the perfect machine would be perfectly dreadful because
it would take away all human freedom and responsibility and opportunity for achievement, but as I came
to look at the story more, it seemed to me the essential human conflict in it is the conflict
between the individual and society and the people in the stories are in a complex and
painful emotional situation because the humanoids are meant to be good, they are presented as
benign, they are trying to assure the safety and happiness of mankind and in doing this
they destroy freedom and I decided eventually that this reflects my own very early childhood
experience when people were overprotecting me because they loved me for my own good,
but still I couldn't help with deep resentment because they wouldn't let me do so many things
I wanted to do and I feel by the way that the conflict between the individual and society
is a basic material of most literature really. You can approach it in all sorts of ways.
At one level, why literature socializes as it teaches us unselfishness and patriotism
and obedience and all sorts of social virtues and at another level why it can be critical
of the influence of society on the individual as in Ebersen especially he presents character
after character who is destroyed by the pressures of society or by conceding too much to society.
In that novel the humanoids of Iron Smith it seemed to me represented society or conformity
and so forth. When I first read the book I kept thinking he was going to turn into an evil
character of villain but you never made him a villain. He remained a friendly person, a
helpful person but simply one who was siding with the humanoids. Has your attitude changed?
Well I think maybe I understand him better. When I was writing the novel I don't think I really
understood him except that he was a fascinating enigma that is he was a likeable guy, he wasn't
caught up in the conflict that my main character was. He got along with the humanoids and they befriended
them, they befriended him and it occurred to me later that he's the example of the person who does conform
to society who accepts its limitations and as a result of that is unable to live a more relaxed
and richer life in contrast to the person always in conflict with society who in the worst instance
has to destroy himself because nobody can live alone.
If you were to continue with the humanoid, you know further than you have the humanoid stories,
would you ultimately have them man being happy under their care? Would they stop conquering the universe?
Well I haven't planned to do that. In fact I was reluctant to write any more about them until Fred
Poll offered me a contract I couldn't refuse but in this new novel the humanoid touch where I tried to
work out an alternative that doesn't involve the destruction of the humanoids but does offer an alternate way
of life that isn't escaped from and I don't know how readers will react but the story, I enjoyed writing
and I have hopes for it.
Well you must have, when you finish the humanoids with folded hands, say when you finish with folded hands
in that time period, you must have gotten some response from readers or editors that was kind of pessimistic
or dystopian because you wrote the equalizer, didn't you, as sort of a counter?
Well more or less in fact the folded hands, the humanoid stories were the first project that I undertook
after I got home from World War II. I was an Air Force's weather forecaster in the southwest Pacific
when the bomb went off and the atomic bomb cast a dark mushroom cloud over all science fiction
and much science fiction was suddenly pessimistic about the future and thus this was the setting in which
I wrote the humanoids and when I started to write it I originally felt that they could be somehow
conquered or disposed of or whatever and then as I worked with them I realized that logically
and artistically they were invincible and so I gave up in the middle of a, before I got to the middle
of a novel I had planned and wrote the equalizer as an example of, let's say that technology is benevolent
and it can be used to make a really better world and then I came back to the humanoids
and re-plotted it and wrote the folded hands.
I would just have one more question on the humanoid books, the humanoid material.
I guess some of the readers, some responses I've read about it have been kind of confused
or on both sides of the question as to what you meant.
My concern would be are you optimistic about man and his future and his relation to machines?
Can you control them? Can he survive them? Are they going to destroy him and his nature?
Well, I think I'm optimistic. I try to be optimistic.
I think that once we have technology we can't unhive it.
If we can't put the genie back in the bottle we have to accept it and live with it.
I think that people who want to return to the 18th century or to the Garden of Eden or whatever
are simply trying to whistle in the dark and I think that technology can solve problems
if we use it to solve problems.
So I'm more optimistic than my stories.
I think that to a considerable extent a story should have its own independent theme
more or less independently of what the writer thinks or believes
when I'm trying to write a story where I like to stop after I have a reasonable start
and look at it and decide what the theme is and then rearrange it if necessary
to give it the strongest impact I can.
Do you have any questions in this area, David?
Not about the humanoids. I have one backing up a little bit.
It seems that many of your stories have anticipated scientific discoveries
such as Dark Star Station anticipated neutron stars.
How did you get the ideas about that?
Well, it's hard to say except that I've always been fascinated with sciences.
Well, you can put it as a sort of mystery story of what the world is,
the universe is about its origins and development and meaning
with effort going on in a hundred fields of science to unravel the mystery
and I've always tried to read science magazines and science books
and keep up with what's happening and I'm concerned with what the universe is
and sometimes I had speculation through my own that we're later confirmed, let's say.
I notice a number of stories and in some of your novels,
especially in the late 30s, early 40s, where you described totalitarian kind of societies
like Breakdown, that story I think with the Square Deal, if I remember correctly,
in that area where the humans are struggling to overcome a sort of a totalitarian society,
was that in any way related to the world situation?
Well, I think so. At that time, of course, we were faced with Hitler
and a little bit later with Stalin and I think there were too many stories
of that time that placed us in a struggle with a totalitarian situation
and of course that is sort of an ultimate statement of the problem of the society
versus the individual, the individual being destroyed,
at least his freedom erased by a totally arbitrary society.
If I'm remembering correctly that story Breakdown,
that the one where Boss Kellen was in control and his son wanted to go to the stars,
the research, and the boss had stayed on the earth, forget that.
I took that as very characteristic of your fiction,
that you have to have a goal, a challenge, you have to keep wanting to go,
rather than be structured and restricted in a society.
Kind of something to look forward to to try for.
Well, I think we all need goals and promises and escapes and freedom
and realization of possibility and so forth.
It seems to me that, well, we're caught in this paradoxical situation
between the needs of the individual and the demands of the society
and we can't live completely alone.
We have to have the support and love and so forth of other people
but if society demands too much, it's destructive.
So there's no final answer to it.
It's a matter of precarious set of compromises that goes on as long as we live.
And some people make compromises more successful than others.
I did my dissertation on H.G. Wells,
who I think was a very successful compromiser with society,
who lived a very rich and varied life
and enjoyed the love of many gifted women and so on and so forth
in contrast with a friend of his named Gissing, George Gissing,
wasn't it who met society
or tried to head on and died young and bitter and poor and defeated?
Yeah, didn't you sort of, if I remember one place, you sort of care,
you didn't say this but I got the impression Gissing was the, say, the forester type
in the humanoids and Wells was more the Iron Smith type?
Well, that fits my own notion, so I don't know if I ever said it.
Did you take Wells to be pessimistic or about man's future progress?
Well, I did my dissertation on Wells entitled H.G. Wells' Critic of Progress
and it seems to me that he has, there saying in several ways
that progress is not all we'd like it to be,
that our universe is, hostile is certainly not friendly to progress
and that we have a barrier in the animal nature of mankind
which he explores into such things as the island of Dr. Moro
and then a further notion that progress limits itself,
that is, as an evolutionary struggle and I think Wells was Darwinian,
if you stop struggling you sink back
so you never can reach an ultimate peak and stay there.
But on the other hand, Wells must have had hope for something better
because he spent most of his life in a struggle to build a better society,
to educate us and warn us and shape us for a world state
and he died, I think, more or less in bitter and despair
but still it seems to me that most of his life was lived in hope.
I want to ask you a little bit too.
It's fascinating to me the way science fiction caught on and began
through the thirties and so forth.
Around 1939, if I remember, people like Asimov and Heinlein
and I think it's pronounced Van Boe, is that right?
Van Boeut.
Van Boeut, okay.
They started publishing around that time.
Were you reading these people as they started?
Oh yes, they all started in Kamal's magazine astounding.
He was, well, I don't know whether you'd say,
he Kamal discovered them or they discovered him
but it was, let's say, a small group with a great deal of well fellowship
or fellow understanding and so forth
and it was an exciting period in which to be alive.
In 1940, I spent about a year in Los Angeles
when I spent many Saturday evenings up at Bob Hanlon's home
and on Laurel Canyon in Hollywood
when we had what we called the Manana Literary Society.
It was not an organization, it was just a group of friends
but we got together and talked science fiction
and we were all reading each other science fiction
when it was published
and the field was a lot closer knit than it is now
because everybody could read all that anybody published
and it was a little group and we were much closer together
and by and large we were friends.
Have you kept up personal, well I guess as president
AFWA and so forth, for SWA?
SFWA, Science Fiction and Writers of America.
Well, I still have a lot of old friendships and make new friends
but we have upwards of 500 members in the organization
and nearly all of them have published at least a few stories
and publishers, paperback publishers,
send me probably 20 or 30 free books a month
and most of these I don't have time to read
so I have old friends that I try to keep in touch with,
keep up with but it's impossible for anybody to be as intimately acquainted
with all the field as we all were in the 30s and 40s
but we still have a fellowship sort of subculture
that draws us together in a way that doesn't happen
to readers of Mystery or Westerns or whatever
and it seems to me that basically it's a concern with science
and technology and the impact on human beings
and technology and the future that we have.
Not a realization that the world is changing
and a concern about what the future is going to be like
that the laymen or the mundane as people call them
try to forget maybe because if they see change at all they're afraid of it.
Yeah, I read that when you were younger you were sort of anti-nuclear power
and your position on that has changed over the years.
Well, I'm certainly pro-nuclear power now.
I'm not sure that I was ever strongly against it
except that when I heard that the atom had been split
where I was sort of dismayed, I had known that it was possible
I'd written fiction about it as early as 1930
but I saw that it was going to make life complicated
and I wish that it hadn't happened in my time
but now since we have nuclear power it seems to me
it's the safest and most necessary development that I can see.
You talk about contrasting mind and coal and nuclear power
when you mine coal you bring out a lot of uranium and thorium along with it
when you burn it while you pollute the atmosphere with a lot more radiation
than has ever escaped from a nuclear plant.
You kill people in the mines and on the railways and so on and so forth
so that nobody to the best of my knowledge has yet been killed
in a commercial nuclear accident
and when we were developing steam boat boats on the Mississippi
where we blew up people every few days and nobody thought much about it
so it seems to me we have a sort of exaggerated fear
of nuclear hazards and unwillingness to open our eyes
and balance the realities
and we can produce and use nuclear energy nowadays
and whatever else we do is going to be more expensive
or more dangerous or delayed or whatever
that is space power plants, solar power or whatever
offer glittering possibilities for the next century
but they can't do much for us in the next 10 or 20 or 30 years.
Change the subject for just a minute.
How did you start to collaborate with Frederick Paul?
Well at that time Fred was my agent and I sent him material
and he suggested things that could be done with it.
The first instance was something that I called the conquest of the abyss.
I started out to write a novel about an undersea world
and I pinned a bed sheet on the wall, I made maps, I did research
I described the technologies and invented people and culture and a setup
and I got about halfway through what was meant to be the novel
it just died, I used up all my creativity and planning it
and when Fred came in we got three undersea novels about it
and our reefs of space came about more or less the same way
though somewhat later I had written a 400 page draft
of something called the iron collar man
that had the reefs of space and all the essential background in it
but I wasn't happy with it, I never did do a final draft
and when I showed it to Fred we replotted it and he rewrote it
and it was a very successful revision
speaking of anticipating science
it took a long time to get that into print
and I was afraid that people wouldn't start doing organ transplants too soon
but we did beat the heart transplanters at least by a few years
you're speaking of the body bank in that one?
that was a lot of fun to do and I had the body bank in my version
but Fred came up with a lot of delightfully horrifying variations
and possibilities of the body bank
had you run across that in fiction before to your knowledge or is that the first time you've heard of it?
well so far as I knew it was near the body bank was certainly a new phrase to me
I'm still curious how, I've never understood how someone can say collaborate on a novel
how does that work in your relationship with you?
well first of all a collaboration is a pretty intimate relationship
sort of like a marriage it doesn't work unless you have a mutual trust
and preferably both parties should have complementary abilities
so each one can add something
I've collaborated with several people and always because I felt that they could do something I couldn't
the first collaboration was with the Dr. Miles J Brewer
something like 50 years ago we wrote a novel together as well as a short story
and a novel that I just re-read and in some ways I thought it was pretty good
and I kind of apprenticed myself to Brewer who was selling to Amazing a couple of years ahead of me
and when you look at him now he wasn't a really brilliant writer
but he was competent and serious and took his techniques seriously
and he knew things that I wanted to learn and I did the writing and most of the writing
and he helped with the plotting and suggested revisions and whatever
and with Fred I well respect him and first of all I like him
and then I respect his style, his editorial sense and his craftsmanship generally
and when I'm working with someone like Fred I think a writer needs an audience
that is communication is a two-way process
you need to know your audience and then need feedback from your audience
and I'm doing a first drive for someone like Fred
since I know him it gives a kind of automatic focus
it helps crystallize the point of view
it makes the writing go a lot faster
especially since I know that he's going to do the final drive
I don't have to worry about literary polish
the literations or avoiding rhyming words
and I'm going to read to Fred and write down what comes
and trust him to redo it
In other words in your relationship with him
you sort of get the ideas in the first draft and he does the revision and polishing
basically it
and that was a trilogy, you mentioned the Reese's space
that was a trilogy if I recall
the third book was Rogue Star
one of the ideas that fascinated me in that book
I think it was also in the second book Star Child
the concept of Ascension Star
and combining that with the intelligence with the human intelligence
that was an idea that appealed to me tremendously
and I'm not sure where I got it
Sturgeon wrote a story long ago called Kill Doja
about a sentient thing that seized a bulldozer
and my original notion for the story was to begin with the creation of a mind
that could, let's say, possess matter
could store intelligence I think
and shifting electronic spins or whatever
I had a technique and I wanted to tell the story completely
from the viewpoint of the creature that was made in the laboratory
and enlarged itself successively
until it became the mind of a star
and I did the first draft of the story that way
but Fred didn't like it, felt that it wasn't successful
and so he had me do some more material from viewpoints of the human characters
and the stories it published had shifting points of view
and that's one collaboration that I've always a little bit regretted
because I felt that the way I wanted to do it
from the viewpoint of the alien could have been done
and would have been something more original and difficult
or maybe harder to do
but it worked out very well as a collaboration
and evidently there was something less than successful about my first draft
of Fred wouldn't have wanted to change it
Do you have any questions right now, Debra?
No, I'm fascinated so far
Every once in a while I see portions of your stories, your novels
that are being serialized in books like Galaxy or Amazing or Analog and so forth
and there's one I've read partially but I haven't found the rest of it
the one on Black Lantern and Snow Fire
That was published as the power of blackness
It was three, five novelettes put together
three of them right in the magazine to find us in science fiction
and I guess one in Galaxy and one in Amazing
One thing I saw, it seemed to me especially as a teacher of English
I guess I look for symbolism in some places
that Black Lantern seemed to me to represent say the third world, the oppressed
the Africans, the Latin Americans, a black man from the streets
Well, I think so
My original notion in the story was to write a sort of thought experiment
to set up a story situation that would be a task of primitivism versus progress
in all the theme of primitivism is something that we as teachers of literature
would like to discover in William Faulkner or whatever
and what I did in the story was to set up the planet Ngonka
which was settled many thousand years ago by refugees from a wrecked spaceship
who fell back into savagery on a hard world so that they developed a very primitive society
Meanwhile the galactic civilization continued to evolve
so that Ngonka rediscovered where we have, let's say, an ultimately sophisticated technology
in contrast with more or less ultimate primitivism
and Black Lantern is presented as a member of the primitive society
in conflict with the other society
and at that time I was still teaching school so I did the thing as a series of novellets
so I just a way of getting it written and published
and it probably lacks unity and I feel myself at the middle section of it
it's probably better than the two concluding sections
Did you mean for one of the characters in that story, I think his name was Toul Smith
Did you mean for him to be the same as Iron Smith because he does speak for the computer, the machine?
Well, more or less
I wonder, especially the similarity of name and the way they thought
Well, he's certainly a representative of the technological culture
Would Snowfire have any, I guess I want to say symbolic value although that's not quite the word
Well, I wanted a romance, a love interest
and she appealed to me as a sophisticated, civilized person
and in contact with the savage on his way up
and I felt that there would be electricity between them
The name probably is not too successful
I thought it was sort of striking or appealing at the time
but people have sneered at it
You didn't mean for black and snow, black land or something?
Well, yes, that was part of it
but it's maybe too obvious, let's say